Exercise 4 – Data Flow Analysis
Compilation 0368-3133
Due 8/1/2026 before 23:59
1 Assignment Overview
The fourth exercise implements a dataflow analysis for Lprograms. Specifically, you need to implement an
uninitialized variable analysis for (a subset of) L. The exercise is roughly divided into three parts as follows:
1. Recursively traverse the AST to create an intermediate representation (IR) of the program.
2. Construct a control-flow graph.
3. Compute the results of the analysis using chaotic iterations.
The input for this exercise is a single text file containing a Lprogram in the subset defined below. The
output is a single text file indicating whether the program accesses uninitialized variables and listing them
if it does.
2 The Input Programs
This section defines the valid input programs, which is a subset of L, and describes the semantics that your
analysis must handle.
2.1 Syntax
To simplify the exercise, you may assume that the input program consists only of a single function with the
signature, void main() and global variable declarations of type int. Furthermore, main uses only variables
(global and local) of type intand the library function PrintInt . An input program is not required to
contain the function main or any global variable declarations.
2.2 Semantics of Initializations
Recall that both global and local variables may be initialized upon definition. The initial value can be any
numerical expression involving constants and previously defined variables. These initializations are executed
in the order of their appearance in the source code. Specifically, before entering main , all global variables
with initialized values should be evaluated, including those defined after main .
3 Uninitialized Variables Analysis
One of the most common programming errors is the use of a variable before its definition. This undefined
value may produce incorrect results, memory violations, unpredictable behaviors, and program failure. More
specifically, used-before-set refers to the error occurring when a program uses a variable that has not been
1
assigned an (initialized) value. This uninitialized variable, once used in a calculation, can be quickly prop-
agated throughout the entire program. The program may produce different results each time it runs, may
crash for no apparent reason, or may behave unpredictably [1].
In this exercise, you are asked to implement a conservative compile-time dataflow analysis that detects
used-before-set errors. In class, we have seen a way to implement a used-before-def analysis based on reaching
definitions (see Tutorial 8). Here, you are asked to design a more sophisticated analysis where a definition
sets a variable xto an initialized value only if the value assigned to xis initialized. Note that a simple
used-before-def analysis, as seen in class, will not be sufficient for this case . You will need to
design an analysis that accurately captures this concept.
More formally, a program may have a used-before-set-a-valid-value error1involving variable xif there
is a path pfrom the start of the program to a program point in which an expression using xis evaluated,
and along path peither xis never assigned a value, or the most recent assignment to xdoes not assign it
aninitialized value . An assignment l:x := exp in path psets xto an initialized value if expconsists of
constants and variables that were assigned an initialized value prior to l:x := exp inp. Stated differently,
assigning a variable with an expression involving an uninitialized value does not initialize that variable.
These definitions consider variable shadowing and distinguish between different instances of xin different
scopes (see the example in Fig. 4). Your analysis should detect and report all variables possibly involved in
used-before-set errors. The following examples clarify these notions:
1. The program in Fig. 1 has use-before-set errors involving variables gandy. Note that gis used in an
assignment command while yis used as part of a boolean condition.
2. The program in Fig. 2 has use-before-set errors involving variables g,x, and y. Note that xis assigned a
value before it is used. This assignment, however, is to an expression containing g, which is uninitialized
at that point.
3. The program in Fig. 3 also has use-before-set errors involving variables g,x, and y. Note that the use
ofginPrintInt(g) is considered a use-before-set error because the loop body may never execute.
Also, note that although yis involved in two potential use-before-set errors (one when evaluating the
condition of the ifstatement and one during the assignment y := y - 1 ), it is printed only once.
The analysis should not try to infer the infeasibility of paths at compile time. For example, if we
replace the declaration of yin Figure 3 with:
i n t y := 10;
then the analysis should still report that variables xandgmay be used-before-set, although the body
of the loop in the program in Fig. 3 is always executed and thus assigns an initialized value to g.
4. The program in Fig. 4 has a use-before-set error involving variable x. Although xis initialized in the
global scope, it is redefined again inside the function main , where it is uninitialized.
5. The program in Fig. 5 has no use-before-set errors.
4 Implementation Notes
•In the final exercise, you will be required to translate anyLprogram into IR and perform live variables
(orliveness ) analysis on arbitrary Lprograms. The results of this analysis will be used to allocate the
unbounded number of temporary variables to a fixed number of physical registers. Keep this in mind
when implementing the translation to IR and the DFA engine in this exercise.
•Use the semantic information from the previous exercise to identify which variable declaration corre-
sponds to each usage. The offset annotation is particularly useful to distinguish between variables with
the same name.
1For brevity, from now on we will refer to such an error as a used-before-set error.
2
•The IR used in the project includes temporary variables. However, the final output must only list high-
level variable names. You should consider how the use of these temporaries propagates uninitialized
values through the code and design your analysis to track these dependencies accordingly.
5 Input and Output
Input: The input for this exercise is a single text file, the input program in the assumed subset of L. You
can assume that the input program has no lexical, syntax or semantic errors.
Output: The output is a single text file containing one of the following:
•If no read accesses from uninitialized variables are detected: !OK
•Otherwise, a list of the names of the uninitialized variables that were accessed. These names must be
sorted lexicographically and printed on separate lines.
6 Submission Guidelines
Each group should have only one student submit the solution via the course Moodle. Submit all your code
in a single zip file named <ID>.zip , where <ID> is the ID of the submitting student. The zip file must have
the following structure at the top level:
1. A text file named ids.txt containing the IDs of all team members (one ID per line).
2. A folder named ex4/ containing all your source code.
Inside the ex4folder, include a makefile at ex4/Makefile . This makefile must build your source files
into the static analyzer, which should be a runnable jar file located at ex4/ANALYZER (note the lack of .jar
suffix). You may reuse the makefile provided in the skeleton, or create a new one if you prefer.
Command-line usage: ANALYZER receives 2 parameters (file paths):
•input (input file path)
•output (output file path containing the expected output)
Self-check script: Before submitting, you must run the self-check script provided with this exercise.
This script verifies that your source code compiles successfully using your makefile and passes several
provided tests. You must execute the self-check on your submission zip file within the school server
(nova.cs.tau.ac.il ) and ensure that your submission passes all checks. Follow these steps:
1. Download self-check-ex4.zip from the course Moodle and place it in the same directory as your
submission zip file. Make sure no other files are present in that directory.
2. Run the following commands:
unzip self-check-ex4.zip
python self-check.py
Make sure that your ids.txt file follows the required format, and that your makefile does notcontain
hard-coded paths. The self-check script does notverify these aspects automatically and you are responsible
for ensuring that your code compiles correctly in any directory.
Submissions that fail to compile or do not produce the required runnable will receive a
grade of 0, and resubmissions will not be allowed.
3
7 Starter Code
The exercise skeleton can be found in the repository for this exercise. The skeleton provides a partial
implementation of the IR translation, which you may modify as needed. Some files of interest in the provided
skeleton:
•src/ast/*.java (classes for the AST nodes with an additional irMe method, implementing the AST
visitor pattern described in tutorial 7)
•src/TEMP/*.java (contains a class that represents a temporary variable and implementation of the
helper function getFreshTEMP (called freshVar in class) that generates a fresh unused before tempo-
rary variable)
•src/IR/*.java (classes for the IR commands)
Note that you need to use your own LEX and CUP configuration files from previous exercises, as well as
your own AST nodes classes, as the ones in the skeleton provide only a partial implementation.
Building and running the skeleton: From the ex4directory, run:
$ make
This performs the following steps:
•Generates the relevant files using jflex/cup
•Compiles the modules into ANALYZER
•Runs ANALYZER oninput/Input.txt
References
[1] Thi Viet Nga Nguyen, Fran¸ cois Irigoin, Corinne Ancourt, and Fabien Coelho. Automatic detection of
uninitialized variables. In G¨ orel Hedin, editor, Compiler Construction , pages 217–231, Berlin, Heidelberg,
2003. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
int g ;
void main ( ) {
int x ;
int y ;
int z ;
x := 1 ;
i f(y>0) {z := x + g + 1 ; x := x + 1; }
}
// expected output :
g
y
Figure 1: A program accessing uninitialized local and global variables.
4
int g ;
void main ( ) {
int x := g ∗2 ;
int y ;
int z ;
g := 1 ;
i f(y>0) {z := x + 1 ; }
}
// expected output :
g
x
y
Figure 2: A program accessing uninitialized local and global variables.
int g ;
void main ( ) {
int x ;
int y ;
int z ;
while (y>0) {z := x + 1 ; g :=1; y:= y −1;}
PrintInt ( g ) ;
}
// expected output :
g
x
y
Figure 3: A program accessing uninitialized local and global variables.
int x := 1 ;
void main ( ) {
int x ;
int y := x ;
}
// expected output :
x
Figure 4: A program accessing uninitialized local variable.
5
int g0 := 0 ;
int g:= g0 + 1 ;
void main ( ) {
int x := g ∗2 + 3 ;
int y := 10;
int z ;
int w;
while (y>0) {z := x + 1 + y ; g :=1; y:= y −1;}
PrintInt ( g ) ;
}
// expected output :
!OK
Figure 5: A program which does not access uninitialized variables.
6
