Exercise 5 – Code Generation
Compilation 0368-3133
Due 15/3/2026 before 23:59
1 Assignment Overview
Congratulations! You have reached the final step in building a complete compiler for Lprograms. The fifth
and final exercise implements the code generation phase for Lprograms. The chosen destination language
is MIPS assembly, favored for its straightforward syntax, complete toolchain and available tutorials. The
exercise can be roughly divided into three parts as follows:
•Recursively traverse the AST to create an intermediate representation (IR) of the program.
•Perform liveness analysis, build the interference graph, and allocate those hundreds (or so) temporaries
into 10 physical registers.
•Translate the IR into MIPS instructions.
The input for this final exercise is a single text file containing a Lprogram. The output is a single text
file containing the corresponding MIPS assembly translation.
2 The L Runtime Behavior
This section describes how Lprograms execute.
2.1 Binary Operations
Integers: Integers in Lare artificially bounded between −215and 215−1. The semantics of integer binary
operations in Lis therefore somewhat different than that of standard programming languages. Luses
saturation arithmetic : results exceeding the range are “clamped” to the nearest boundary. For any operator
⊙ ∈ { +,−,∗, /}(where /denotes integer floor division ⌊a/b⌋), let⊙[L]denote the corresponding operator
inL. The operation is defined as follows:
a⊙[L]b=

−2^15if (a⊙b)≤ −2^15
2^15−1 if ( a⊙b)≥2^15−1
a⊙b otherwise
Strings: Strings can be concatenated with binary operation +, and tested for (contents) equality with
binary operator =. When concatenating two (null terminated) strings {si}2
i=1, the resulting string s1s2is
allocated on the heap, and should be null terminated. The result of testing contents equality is either 1 when
they are equal, or 0 otherwise.
Arrays: Testing equality of arrays should be done by comparing the address values of the two arrays. The
result is 1 if they are equal and otherwise 0.
1
Classes: Testing equality of class objects should be done by comparing the address values of the two
objects. The result is 1 if they are equal and otherwise 0.
2.2 If and While Statements
If and while statements in Lbehave similarly to (practically) all programming languages.
Control Flow: Both constructs evaluate an integer condition, where 0 represents false and any non-zero
value represents true.
While statements: The condition is evaluated before every iteration. If the condition is non-zero, the
body is executed, and the process repeats. If the condition is 0, the loop terminates, and control passes to
the statement immediately following the loop body.
If statements: The condition is evaluated first. If the result is non-zero, the body of the if is executed. If
the result is 0, the body of the else is executed (if one is present). Upon completion of either path, control
continues to the statement immediately following the entire structure.
2.3 Program Execution and Evaluation Order
Program entry point: Every (valid) Lprogram has a main function with signature: void main() . This
function is the entry point of execution.
Function argument evaluation: When calling a function with more than one input parameter, the
evaluation order matters. You should evaluate the sent parameters from left to right, so for example, the
code in Figure 1 should print 32766 .1
class counter { int i := 32767; }
counter c := nil;
int inc(){ c.i := c.i + 1; return 0;}
int dec(){ c.i := c.i - 1; return 9;}
int foo(int m, int n){ return c.i; }
void main()
{
c := new counter;
PrintInt(foo(inc(),dec()));
}
Figure 1: Evaluation order of a called function’s parameters matters.
Global variables initialization: When initializing global variables, the order matters and should match
their order of appearance in the original program. As in the fourth exercise, before entering main, allglobal
variables with initialized values should be evaluated. Note that global variables may be initialized using
arbitrary non-constant expressions .
Binary operations and assignments: For all binary operations (including assignment), the left-hand
side should be evaluated first.
1Recall that integer operations use saturation arithmetic, and that the maximum value is 215−1 = 32767.
2
Class data members initialization: Occurs during object construction. The specific order in which
data members are initialized is irrelevant. You may assume that data members may be initialized only with
constant literals (specifically integers, strings, and nil).
2.4 Library Functions
You can assume that the names PrintInt andPrintString are never redefined. Consequently, calling these
functions always invokes the corresponding Llibrary functions. Both functions must be implemented using
the corresponding MIPS system calls. Specifically:
•PrintInt prints the integer argument followed by a single space.
•PrintString prints the string argument.
(Note: The implementation of PrintInt , including the trailing space, is provided in the starter code).
2.5 Runtime Checks
Lenforces three kinds of runtime checks: division by zero, invalid pointer dereference, and out-of-bounds
array access. In all cases, the program must print a specific error message and exit gracefully (using the exit
system call).
Division by zero: Must be detected when a denominator evaluates to 0.
•Error message: Illegal Division By Zero
•Example:
int i:= 6; while (i+1) { int j := 8/i; i := i-1; }
Invalid pointer dereference: Occurs when attempting to access a field, method, or array element of a
class orarray variable that is uninitialized or holding the value nil.
•Error message: Invalid Pointer Dereference
•Examples:
class Father { int i; int j; } Father f; int i := f.i;
class Father { int i; int j; } Father f := nil; int i := f.i;
Out of bound array access: Occurs when the accessed index falls outside the valid boundaries of the
array. That is, when the index is negative or greater than or equal to the length of the array.
•Error message: Access Violation
•Example:
array IntArray = int[]; IntArray A := new int[6]; A[18];
2.6 System Calls
MIPS supports a limited set of system calls, out of which we will need only four: printing an integer, printing
a string, allocating heap memory and exit the program. The specific codes and arguments are detailed in
Table 1.
3
System call example MIPS code Remarks
PrintInt(17) li$a0,17
li$v0,1
syscall
string s:="abc";
PrintString(s).data
myLovelyStr: .asciiz "abc"
.text
main:
la$a0,myLovelyStr
li$v0,4
syscallPrinted string must be null
terminated. It can be allo-
cated inside the text section,
or in the heap.
Malloc(17) li$a0,17
li$v0,9
syscallThe allocated address is re-
turned in $v0. Note that the
allocation size is specified in
bytes.
Exit() li$v0,10
syscallMake sure every MIPS pro-
gram ends with exit.
Table 1: Relevant MIPS system calls.
3 Additional Guidelines
Uninitialized variables: You are not required to perform the uninitialized variable analysis from the
previous exercise. Accessing an uninitialized variable results in undefined behavior. Hence, we will not check
scenarios where the behavior of the program depends on uninitialized variables.
Register allocation: The register allocation is performed on the IR. Since the IR is low-level, performing
operations on virtual registers (temporaries) and accessing variables via loads/stores, register allocation
applies strictly to temporaries. You should only allocate registers $t0-$t9.
You should implement only simplification-based register allocation. Specifically, you are notrequired to
implement register spilling or MOV instruction coalescing. If the allocator fails to color the graph (meaning
a spill would be necessary), the compiler must print Register Allocation Failed and terminate.
Important: We will check specific cases where the allocation should fail. Since the number of physical
registers required depends on the specific translation to IR and the subsequent translation from IR to MIPS,
you must follow the translation scheme provided in the tutorial to guarantee predictable behavior. You are
provided with one specific test case where allocation fails because the number of function arguments exceeds
the limit of available physical registers.
MIPS code generation: The translation from IR commands to MIPS instructions is generally straight-
forward. However, if the translation requires the use of registers beyond those allocated to the temporaries
in the IR command (as may happen in array accesses and method calls), you can use registers $s0–$s9.
4 Input and Output
Input: The input for this exercise is a single text file, the input Lprogram. In this exercise, you should
handle the entire Lprogramming language. (Recall that in exercise 4 you were allowed to assume that the
input program is written in a simple subset of L.)
Output: The output is a single text file containing exactly one of the following:
4
•ERROR
If a lexical error is detected.
•ERROR( location )
If a syntax or semantic error is detected. The location is the line number of the first error encountered.
•Register Allocation Failed
If the register allocation fails.
•The MIPS assembly translation of the input program
If no errors occurred.
5 SPIM
The project uses the SPIM 8.0 simulator. To use it outside the school server, you may need to install it:
sudo apt-get install spim
Note that your compiler must output a text file containing the translated MIPS instructions. We will
grade the assignment by running this output file directly in SPIM.
6 Submission Guidelines
Each group should have only one student submit the solution via the course Moodle. Submit all your code
in a single zip file named <ID>.zip , where <ID> is the ID of the submitting student. The zip file must have
the following structure at the top level:
1. A text file named ids.txt containing the IDs of all team members (one ID per line).
2. A folder named ex5/ containing all your source code.
Inside the ex5folder, include a makefile at ex5/Makefile . This makefile must build your source files
into the compiler, which should be a runnable jar file located at ex5/COMPILER (note the lack of .jar suffix).
You may reuse the makefile provided in the skeleton, or create a new one if you prefer.
Command-line usage: COMPILER receives 2 parameters (file paths):
•input (input file path)
•output (output file path containing the expected output)
Self-check script: Before submitting, you must run the self-check script provided with this exercise.
This script verifies that your source code compiles successfully using your makefile and passes several
provided tests. You must execute the self-check on your submission zip file within the school server
(nova.cs.tau.ac.il ) and ensure that your submission passes all checks. Follow these steps:
1. Download self-check-ex5.zip from the course Moodle and place it in the same directory as your
submission zip file. Make sure no other files are present in that directory.
2. Run the following commands:
unzip self-check-ex5.zip
python self-check.py
5
Make sure that your ids.txt file follows the required format, and that your makefile does notcontain
hard-coded paths. The self-check script does notverify these aspects automatically and you are responsible
for ensuring that your code compiles correctly in any directory.
Note: The script fails if any provided test fails. If the failure is not due to the output
format and you cannot pass all tests by the submission date, it is still acceptable to submit.
Submissions that fail to compile or do not produce the required runnable will receive a
grade of 0, and resubmissions will not be allowed.
7 Starter Code
The exercise skeleton can be found in the repository for this exercise. The skeleton provides a basic translation
of the IR to MIPS instructions, which you may modify as needed. Some files of interest in the provided
skeleton:
•src/ir/*.java (classes for the IR commands with an additional mipsMe method that contains the
translation to MIPS)
•src/mips/MipsGenerator.java (contains methods to print MIPS instructions to the output)
•examples contain two simple Lprograms and their corresponding MIPS translations.
•input andexpected output contain input tests and their corresponding expected results. Note that
the expected output files contain the results generated by SPIM with the compiled MIPS code as input.
As in previous exercises, you need to use your own files from previous exercises.
Building and running the skeleton: From the ex5directory, run:
$ make
This performs the following steps:
•Generates the relevant files using jflex/cup.
•Compiles the modules into COMPILER .
To also run COMPILER oninput/Input.txt and execute the program using SPIM, run:
$ make everything
This performs the following additional steps:
•Runs COMPILER oninput/Input.txt to generate the MIPS assembly file ( MIPS.txt ).
(Note: The provided skeleton code is currently hardcoded to write the MIPS output to MIPS.txt ,
regardless of the command-line arguments).
•Runs the MIPS program using SPIM and creates a file with the program output ( MIPS OUTPUT.txt ).
Note: the steps performed in everything mode should not be performed when running make using your own
makefile.
6
